Dear Prof. Torgersen,

It is a great honor and pleasure to be in contact with you.

This is Fabian A. Bombardelli, an Associate Professor at the Department of Civil and Environmental
Engineering at UC Davis.

The reason I am contacting you today is to explore with you the possibility of  NSF funding for
a Rapid Response Research Grant (RAPID) to undertake unique field observations during, and after the floods
in the Yolo Bypass (YB), in Northern California. The YB serves as an emergency floodplain of the Sacramento River
and, as such, is occupied by waters when the transport capacity of the river is largely exceeded. 
Currently, the YB is under a lot of water because the Sacramento Weir gates were opened on Tuesday, and the peak flooding occurred yesterday. This leaves
about two weeks for further observations during the flood and afterwards. Further, there seems to be a large probability
that another storm system would reach the area next week, so the observation conditions would extend for other two weeks. The last time a flood was large enough to warrant opening the gates was 2006! This flood has been amply covered by the news outlets (please see http://www.sacbee.com/news/weather/article126099759.html)

In particular, the YB  is a critical component of a plan by the state of California (California Eco Restore) in order 
to implement habitat restoration actions in the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta. In our Department and in my group, we have been
working on simulating the flow in the YB, in order to understand the interaction of hydrodynamics and primary productivity and 
habitat creation. The ephemeral nature of floodplain habitat leads to an immediate need for data collection during high waters. 
This is a unique opportunity in that there is scarce knowledge of such interaction in systems like this. The 10-year flood frequency 
is commonly used in restoration evaluation for hydrodynamic modeling.  

I attach some results of modeling developed at UC Davis by student Lily Tomkovic. We have presented calibration results in a
poster at the last Fall Delta Science conference and in a presentation at Floodplain Management Association conference.

Our plan is to fly a drone over the flood waters on the Yolo Bypass while simultaneously releasing tracers in the flow. The imagery 
will then be used in order to perform large-scale particle tracking velocimetry (LSPTV)
which will provide detailed information on flow dynamics on critical areas of the Bypass. To that end, we have direct
access to software developed by the USGS. Drone images can be of help to determine the movement of birds in time during the flood
evolution. In addition to particle tracking, the drone could be used to take imagery of the delineation of the flood footprint at 
specific moments, providing a means for further understanding and calibration of our hydrodynamic models of the Bypass. These observations also allow for insight to the draining of the Bypass, which provides information on many proposed restoration efforts. Our observations would prove useful to many agencies' models and efforts on the YB.

Furthermore, we wish to survey the conditions after the flood, both from the perspective of biota and bathymetric change in the YB. (We would do this with LiIDAR and other methods.) The LiDAR survey will permit the validation of our sediment transport models, by comparing before and after bathymetry. This aspect is also extremely timely, as the YB is used for agriculture between major flooding events, so within a few weeks farmers will commence re-levelling fields and eradicating the signature of this major flood event.

The team will be composed of Prof. Geoffrey Schladow, Dr. William Fleenor, MS/PhD student Lily Tomkovic, and myself as PI. We can complete
and send a proposal tomorrow.

Please let me know if I can have the honor to have a phone conversation with you, and what time is more convenient. My cell is 530 5740922
and my office phone is 530 7520949.   

Best wishes and thank you in advance.

Fabian
